# Data Modeling with Postgres - Sparkify

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their mew music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like to have a database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. The aim of this project is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis.

## Datasets

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```json
{
  "num_songs": 1,
  "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7",
  "artist_latitude": null,
  "artist_longitude": null,
  "artist_location": "",
  "artist_name": "Line Renaud",
  "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1",
  "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff",
  "duration": 152.92036,
  "year": 0
}
```

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by [this event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

And below is an example of what a single log file, 2018-11-01.json, looks like.

```json
{"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Walter","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Frye","length":null,"level":"free","location":"San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540919166796.0,"sessionId":38,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1541105830796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"39"}
{"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Kaylee","gender":"F","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Summers","length":null,"level":"free","location":"Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540344794796.0,"sessionId":139,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1541106106796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/35.0.1916.153 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"8"}
{"artist":"Des'ree","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Kaylee","gender":"F","itemInSession":1,"lastName":"Summers","length":246.30812,"level":"free","location":"Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540344794796.0,"sessionId":139,"song":"You Gotta Be","status":200,"ts":1541106106796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/35.0.1916.153 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"8"}
```

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, a star schema is created for optimized queries on song play analysis. The star schema in this case consists of one fact table (songplays) which references the primary keys of dimension tables (users, songs, artists, time). This structure enables analysts to easily aggragate data using simple SQL queries with joins.

### Fact Table

1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
   - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables

1. users - users in the app
   - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
1. songs - songs in music database
   - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
1. artists - artists in music database
   - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
1. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
   - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

Duplicate values in the tables are eliminated with the upsert constraints in insert queries. In case the subscription of a user changes to `paid` from `free` we do an update on duplicate to reflect this change in the database.

## Run locally

### Create and run PostgreSQL with docker

If you don't want to set up PostgreSQL you can run it using docker on your local machine like me.

Build the image

```
docker build -t postgres-student-image  ./
```

Run the container

```
docker run -d --name postgres-student-container -p 5432:5432 postgres-student-image
```

Stop and remove the container after you're done

```
docker stop postgres-student-container
docker rm postgres-student-container
```

### Set up pipenv and install packages

If you don't have `pipenv` you can check it out [here.](https://pypi.org/project/pipenv/)

Run pipenv install to install packages defined on Pipfile

```
pipenv install
```

Run pipenv shell to activate the environement

```
pipenv shell
```

### Create the DB and run ETL pipeline

Create DB and tables

```
python create_tables.py
```

Run ETL pipeline

```
python etl.py
```
